DOCS: update optimizer docs, harmonize spelling, add Yul-based optimizer (#11242)
ethereum/solidity: docs/internals/optimizer.rst

.. index:: optimizer, optimiser, common subexpression elimination, constant propagation
.. _optimizer:

*************
The Optimizer
*************

> The Solidity compiler uses two different optimizer modules: The “old” optimizer

Reviewer: Can you replace all `“` by `"`?

    tag_return:
      ...opcodes after call to f...

    tag_f:
      ...body of function f...
      jump      // out

In this situation the "PeepholeOptimizer" will remove the return jump. Ideally, all of this can be done
for all references to ``tag_f`` leaving it unused, s.t. it can be removed, yielding:

.. code-block:: text

      ...body of function f...
      ...opcodes after call to f...

So the call to function ``f`` is inlined and the original definition of ``f`` can be removed.

Inlining like this is attempted, whenever a heuristics suggests that inlining is cheaper over the lifetime of a
contract than not inlining. This heuristics depends on the size of the function body, the
number of other references to its tag (approximating the number of calls to the function) and
the expected number of executions of the contract (the global optimizer parameter "runs").

Yul-Based Optimizer Module
==========================

The Yul-based optimizer consists of several stages and components that all transform
the AST in a semantically equivalent way. The goal is to end up either with code
that is shorter or at least only marginally longer but will allow further
optimization steps.

> The optimizer currently follows a purely greedy strategy and does not do any

Reviewer: Can you add something like "Since the optimizer is under heavy development, the information here might be outdated. If you rely on a certain functionality, please ask the team directly."?

.. index:: optimizer, optimiser, common subexpression elimination, constant propagation
.. _optimizer:

*************
The Optimizer
*************

The Solidity compiler uses two different optimizer modules: The "old" optimizer
that operates at opcode level and the "new" optimizer that operates on Yul IR code.

The opcode-based optimizer applies a set of `simplification rules <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/libevmasm/RuleList.h>`_
to opcodes. It also combines equal code sets and removes unused code.

The Yul-based optimizer is much more powerful, because it can work across function

> calls: In Yul it is not possible to perform arbitrary jumps, so it is for example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
calls: In Yul, it is not possible to perform arbitrary jumps, so it is for example
```

possible to compute the side-effects of each function: If a function does not modify
storage, a call to it can be swapped with a function that does. If a function is

> side-effect free and its result is multiplied by zero, you can remove the function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
possible to compute the side-effects of each function. Consider two function calls,
where the first does not modify the storage and the second modifies the storage. If their arguments and return values does not depend on each other, we can reorder the function calls. Similarly, if a function is
side-effect free and its result is multiplied by zero, you can remove the function
```

> where the first does not modify the storage and the second modifies the storage. If their arguments and return values does not depend on each other, we can reorder the function calls. Similarly, if a function is

Reviewer 2: Adding a line break would be nice here. Probably better to do locally.

call completely.

Currently, the parameter ``--optimize`` activates the opcode-based optimizer for the
generated bytecode and the Yul optimizer for the Yul code generated internally, for example for ABI coder v2.
One can use ``solc --ir-optimized --optimize`` to produce
optimized experimental Yul IR for a Solidity source. Similarly, use ``solc --strict-assembly --optimize``
for a stand-alone Yul mode.

You can find more details on both optimizer modules and their optimization steps below.

Benefits of Optimizing Solidity Code
====================================

Overall, the optimizer tries to simplify complicated expressions, which reduces both code

> size and execution cost. It also specializes or inlines functions. Especially

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
size and execution cost, i.e., it can reduce gas needed for contract deployment as well as external calls to the contract. It also specializes or inlines functions. Especially
```
It's probably good to include the word `gas` somewhere.

BlockFlattener
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This stage eliminates nested blocks by inserting the statement in the
inner block at the appropriate place in the outer block:

::

    {
        let x := 2
        {
            let y := 3
            mstore(x, y)
        }
    }

is transformed to

::

    {
        let x := 2
        let y := 3
        mstore(x, y)
    }

As long as the code is disambiguated, this does not cause a problem because
the scopes of variables can only grow.

.. _loop-invariant-code-motion:

LoopInvariantCodeMotion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This optimization moves movable SSA variable declarations outside the loop.

Only statements at the top level in a loop's body or post block are considered, i.e variable
declarations inside conditional branches will not be moved out of the loop.

Requirements:

 - The Disambiguator, ForLoopInitRewriter and FunctionHoister must be run upfront.
 - Expression splitter and SSA transform should be run upfront to obtain better result.

Function-Level Optimizations
----------------------------

.. _function-specializer:

FunctionSpecializer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This step specializes the function with its literal arguments.

> If a function, say, ``function f(a, b) { sstore (a, b)}``, is called with literal arguments, for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a function, say, ``function f(a, b) { sstore (a, b) }``, is called with literal arguments, for
```

example, ``f(x, 5)``, where ``x`` is an identifier, it could be specialized by creating a new
function ``f_1`` that takes only one argument, i.e.,

::

>     function f_1(a_1) {
>     let b_1 := 5
>     sstore(a_1, b_1)
>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    function f_1(a_1) {
        let b_1 := 5
        sstore(a_1, b_1)
    }
```

::

  function f(a,b) -> x { x := div(a,b) }
  function f2(a,b,c) -> x, y { x := f(a,b) }

and replace all references to ``f`` by ``f2``.
The inliner should be run afterwards to make sure that all references to ``f2`` are replaced by
``f``.

Prerequisites: Disambiguator, FunctionHoister, LiteralRematerialiser.

The step LiteralRematerialiser is not required for correctness. It helps deal with cases such as:
``function f(x) -> y { revert(y, y} }`` where the literal ``y`` will be replaced by its value ``0``,
allowing us to rewrite the function.

.. _equivalent-function-combiner:

EquivalentFunctionCombiner
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If two functions are syntactically equivalent, while allowing variable
renaming but not any re-ordering, then any reference to one of the
functions is replaced by the other.

The actual removal of the function is performed by the Unused Pruner.

Function Inlining
-----------------

.. _functional-inliner:

FunctionalInliner
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This component of the optimizer performs restricted function inlining by inlining functions that can be
inlined inside functional expressions, i.e. functions that:

 - return a single value.

>  - have a body like r := <functional expression>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - have a body like ``r := <functional expression>``.
```

``E`` is an expression that does not reference ``r`` and all arguments in the function call are movable expressions.

The result of this inlining is always a single expression.

This component can only be used on sources with unique names.

.. _full-function-inliner:

FullFunctionInliner
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Full Function Inliner replaces certain calls of certain functions
by the function's body. This is not very helpful in most cases, because
it just increases the code size but does not have a benefit. Furthermore,
code is usually very expensive and we would often rather have shorter
code than more efficient code. In same cases, though, inlining a function
can have positive effects on subsequent optimizer steps. This is the case
if one of the function arguments is a constant, for example.

During inlining, a heuristic is used to tell if the function call
should be inlined or not.
The current heuristic does not inline into "large" functions unless
the called function is tiny. Functions that are only used once
are inlined, as well as medium-sized functions, while function
calls with constant arguments allow slightly larger functions.

> In the future, we might want to have a backtracking component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the future, we may include a backtracking component
```

that, instead of inlining a function right away, only specializes it,
which means that a copy of the function is generated where
a certain parameter is always replaced by a constant. After that,
we can run the optimizer on this specialized function. If it
results in heavy gains, the specialized function is kept,
otherwise the original function is used instead.

Cleanup
-------

The cleanup is performed at the end of the optimizer run. It tries
to combine split expressions into deeply nested ones again and also
improves the "compilability" for stack machines by eliminating
variables as much as possible.

.. _expression-joiner:

ExpressionJoiner
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the opposite operation of the expression splitter. It turns a sequence of
variable declarations that have exactly one reference into a complex expression.
This stage fully preserves the order of function calls and opcode executions.

> It does not make use of any information concerning the commutability of opcodes;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It does not make use of any information concerning the commutativity of the opcodes;
```
?

Author: @chriseth ?

Reviewer: Yes, commutativity is better.

.. index:: optimizer, optimiser, common subexpression elimination, constant propagation
.. _optimizer:

*************
The Optimizer
*************

The Solidity compiler uses two different optimizer modules: The "old" optimizer
that operates at opcode level and the "new" optimizer that operates on Yul IR code.

> The opcode-based optimizer applies simplification rules from the
> `list to opcodes <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/libevmasm/RuleList.h>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The opcode-based optimizer applies a set of `simplification rules <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/libevmasm/RuleList.h>`_ to opcodes
```

next to each other. It also combines equal code sets and removes unused code.

The Yul-based optimizer is much more powerful, because it can work across function
calls: In Yul it is not possible to perform arbitrary jumps, so it is for example
possible to compute the side-effects of each function: If a function does not modify
storage, a call to it can be swapped with a function that does. If a function is
side-effect free and its result is multiplied by zero, you can remove the function
call completely.

Currently, the parameter ``--optimize`` activates the opcode-based optimizer for the

> generated bytecode and the Yul optimizer for the Yul code generated for ABIv2 codec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generated bytecode and the Yul optimizer for the Yul code generated internally, for example for ABI coder v2.
```

> For a Yul-based codegen, one can use ``solc --ir-optimized --optimize`` to produce
> optimized Yul for a Solidity source. Similarly, use ``solc --strict-assembly --optimize``
> for a stand-alone Yul mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can use ``solc --ir-optimized --optimize`` to produce
optimized experimental Yul IR for a Solidity source. Similarly, use ``solc --strict-assembly --optimize``
for a stand-alone Yul mode.
```

You can find more details on both optimizer modules and their optimization steps below.

Benefits of Optimizing Solidity Code
====================================

Overall, the optimizer tries to simplify complicated expressions, which reduces both code
size and execution cost. It also specializes or inlines functions. Especially
function inlining is an operation that can cause much bigger code, but it is
often done because it results in opportunities for more simplifications.

Differences between Optimized and Non-Optimized Code
====================================================

Generally, the most visible difference would be constant expressions getting evaluated.
When it comes to the ASM output, one can also notice reduction of equivalent/duplicate
"code blocks" (compare the output of the flags ``--asm`` and ``--asm --optimize``). However,
when it comes to the Yul/intermediate-representation, there can be significant
differences, for example, functions can get inlined, combined, rewritten to eliminate
redundancies, etc. (compare the output between the flags ``--ir`` and
``--optimize --ir-optimized``).

> Optimize Runs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimizer Parameter Runs
```

=============

The number of runs (``--optimize-runs``) specifies roughly how often each opcode of the

> deployed code will be executed across the life-time of the contract. A "runs" parameter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deployed code will be executed across the life-time of the contract. This means it is a trade-off parameter between code size (deploy cost) and code execution cost (cost after deployment). A "runs" parameter
```

of "1" will produce short but expensive code. The largest value is ``2**32-1``.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:
  A common misconception is that this parameter specifies the number of iterations of the optimizer.
  This is not true: The optimizer will always run as many times as it can still improve the code.
```

Rematerialiser
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The rematerialisation stage tries to replace variable references by the expression that
was last assigned to the variable. This is of course only beneficial if this expression
is comparatively cheap to evaluate. Furthermore, it is only semantically equivalent if
the value of the expression did not change between the point of assignment and the
point of use. The main benefit of this stage is that it can save stack slots if it
leads to a variable being eliminated completely (see below), but it can also
save a DUP opcode on the EVM if the expression is very cheap.

The Rematerialiser uses the Dataflow Analyzer to track the current values of variables,
which are always movable.
If the value is very cheap or the variable was explicitly requested to be eliminated,
the variable reference is replaced by its current value.

WebAssembly specific
--------------------

MainFunction
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Changes the topmost block to be a function with a specific name ("main") which has no
inputs nor outputs.

Depends on the Function Grouper.

## Below steps still need to be sorted into the list above according to their category.

.. _circular-reference-pruner:

> CircularReferencesPruner

Reviewer: Please move into "Statement level"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This stage removes functions that call each other but are
neither externally referenced nor referenced from the outermost context.

.. _conditional-simplifier:

> ConditionalSimplifier

Reviewer: Please move into "Statement level"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Conditional Simplifier inserts assignments to condition variables if the value can be determined
from the control-flow.

Destroys SSA form.

Currently, this tool is very limited, mostly because we do not yet have support
for boolean types. Since conditions only check for expressions being nonzero,
we cannot assign a specific value.

Current features:

 - switch cases: insert "<condition> := <caseLabel>"
 - after if statement with terminating control-flow, insert "<condition> := 0"

Future features:

 - allow replacements by "1"
 - take termination of user-defined functions into account

Works best with SSA form and if dead code removal has run before.

Prerequisite: Disambiguator.

.. _conditional-unsimplifier:

> ConditionalUnsimplifier

Reviewer: Please move into "Statement level"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reverse of Conditional Simplifier.

.. _control-flow-simplifier:

> ControlFlowSimplifier

Reviewer: Please move into "Statement level"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Simplifies several control-flow structures:

 - replace if with empty body with pop(condition)
 - remove empty default switch case
 - remove empty switch case if no default case exists
 - replace switch with no cases with pop(expression)
 - turn switch with single case into if
 - replace switch with only default case with pop(expression) and body
 - replace switch with const expr with matching case body
 - replace ``for`` with terminating control flow and without other break/continue by ``if``
 - remove ``leave`` at the end of a function.

None of these operations depend on the data flow. The StructuralSimplifier
performs similar tasks that do depend on data flow.

The ControlFlowSimplifier does record the presence or absence of ``break``
and ``continue`` statements during its traversal.

Prerequisite: Disambiguator, FunctionHoister, ForLoopInitRewriter.
Important: Introduces EVM opcodes and thus can only be used on EVM code for now.

.. _dead-code-eliminator:

> DeadCodeEliminator

Reviewer: Please move into "Statement level"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This optimization stage removes unreachable code.

Unreachable code is any code within a block which is preceded by a
leave, return, invalid, break, continue, selfdestruct or revert.

Function definitions are retained as they might be called by earlier
code and thus are considered reachable.

Because variables declared in a for loop's init block have their scope extended to the loop body,
we require ForLoopInitRewriter to run before this step.

Prerequisite: ForLoopInitRewriter, Function Hoister, Function Grouper

.. _expression-inliner:

> ExpressionInliner

Reviewer: Dont we have this already?

Author: Where?

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This optimizer component modifies an AST in place, inlining functions that can be
inlined inside functional expressions, i.e. functions that:

 - return a single value.
 - have a body like r := <functional expression>.
 - neither reference themselves nor r in the right hand side.

Furthermore, for all parameters, all of the following need to be true:

 - The argument is movable.
 - The parameter is either referenced less than twice in the function body, or the argument is rather cheap ("cost" of at most 1 like a constant up to 0xff).

This component can only be used on sources with unique names.

.. _for-loop-condition-out-of-body:

> ForLoopConditionOutOfBody

Reviewer: Please move into "cleanup"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reverses the transformation of ForLoopConditionIntoBody.

For any movable ``c``, it turns

::

    for { ... } 1 { ... } {
    if iszero(c) { break }
    ...
    }

into

::

    for { ... } c { ... } {
    ...
    }

and it turns

::

    for { ... } 1 { ... } {
    if c { break }
    ...
    }

into

::

    for { ... } iszero(c) { ... } {
    ...
    }

The LiteralRematerialiser should be run before this step.

.. _function-specializer:

> FunctionSpecializer

Reviewer: Please move into new section "Function Level Optimizations", together with:

unused function parameter pruner
equivalent function combiner

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This step specializes the function with its literal arguments.

If a function, say, ``function f(a, b) { sstore (a, b)}``, is called with literal arguments, for
example, ``f(x, 5)``, where ``x`` is an identifier, it could be specialized by creating a new
function ``f_1`` that takes only one argument, i.e.,

::

    function f_1(a_1) {
    let b_1 := 5
    sstore(a_1, b_1)
    }

Other optimization steps will be able to make more simplifications to the function. The
optimization step is mainly useful for functions that would not be inlined.

Prerequisites: Disambiguator, FunctionHoister

LiteralRematerialiser is recommended as a prerequisite, even though it's not required for
correctness.

.. _literal-rematerialiser:

> LiteralRematerialiser

Reviewer: Please move into "expression scale"

Author: Done, I couldn't find any documentation on the literal rematerialiser yet. Did I miss it somewhere?

Reviewer: I couldn't find anything either.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _load-resolver:

> LoadResolver

Reviewer: Please move into "expression scale"

^^^^^^^^^^^^

Optimisation stage that replaces expressions of type ``sload(x)`` and ``mload(x)`` by the value
currently stored in storage resp. memory, if known.

Works best if the code is in SSA form.

Prerequisite: Disambiguator, ForLoopInitRewriter.

.. _loop-invariant-code-motion:

> LoopInvariantCodeMotion

Reviewer: please move into "statement scale"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This optimization moves movable SSA variable declarations outside the loop.

Only statements at the top level in a loop's body or post block are considered, i.e variable
declarations inside conditional branches will not be moved out of the loop.

Requirements:

 - The Disambiguator, ForLoopInitRewriter and FunctionHoister must be run upfront.
 - Expression splitter and SSA transform should be run upfront to obtain better result.

.. _reasoning-based-simplifier:

> ReasoningBasedSimplifier

Reviewer: Please move into "expression scale"

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This optimizer uses SMT solvers to check whether ``if`` conditions are constant.

 - If ``constraints AND condition`` is UNSAT, the condition is never true and the whole body can be removed.
 - If ``constraints AND NOT condition`` is UNSAT, the condition is always true and can be replaced by ``1``.

The simplifications above can only be applied if the condition is movable.

It is only effective on the EVM dialect, but safe to use on other dialects.

Prerequisite: Disambiguator, SSATransform.

.. _var-decl-initializer:

> VarDeclInitializer

Reviewer: Please move into "preprocessing"

save a DUP opcode on the EVM if the expression is very cheap.

The Rematerialiser uses the Dataflow Analyzer to track the current values of variables,
which are always movable.
If the value is very cheap or the variable was explicitly requested to be eliminated,
the variable reference is replaced by its current value.

.. _for-loop-condition-out-of-body:

ForLoopConditionOutOfBody
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reverses the transformation of ForLoopConditionIntoBody.

For any movable ``c``, it turns

::

    for { ... } 1 { ... } {
    if iszero(c) { break }
    ...
    }

into

::

    for { ... } c { ... } {
    ...
    }

and it turns

::

    for { ... } 1 { ... } {
    if c { break }
    ...
    }

into

::

    for { ... } iszero(c) { ... } {
    ...
    }

The LiteralRematerialiser should be run before this step.

WebAssembly specific
--------------------

MainFunction
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Changes the topmost block to be a function with a specific name ("main") which has no
inputs nor outputs.

Depends on the Function Grouper.

## Below steps still need to be sorted into the list above according to their category.

.. _expression-inliner:

> ExpressionInliner

Reviewer: This is the same as `FunctionalInliner`. Can you combine them? I think the second point in the second list here is not covered above.

Benefits of Optimizing Solidity Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Overall, the optimizer tries to simplify complicated expressions, which reduces both code
size and execution cost. It also specializes or inlines functions. Especially
function inlining is an operation that can cause much bigger code, but it is
often done because it results in opportunities for more simplifications.

Differences between Optimized and Non-Optimized Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generally, the most visible difference would be constant expressions getting evaluated.
When it comes to the ASM output, one can also notice reduction of equivalent/duplicate
“code blocks” (compare the output of the flags ``--asm`` and ``--asm --optimize``). However,
when it comes to the Yul/intermediate-representation, there can be significant
differences, for example, functions can get inlined, combined, rewritten to eliminate
redundancies, etc. (compare the output between the flags ``--ir`` and
``--optimize --ir-optimized``).

Optimize Runs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The number of runs (``--optimize-runs``) specifies roughly how often each opcode of the

> deployed code will be executed across the life-time of the contract. A “runs” parameter

Reviewer: Can you avoid using non-ascii characters, please? :)

Author: done

that is shorter or at least only marginally longer but will allow further
optimization steps.

The optimizer currently follows a purely greedy strategy and does not do any
backtracking.

All components of the Yul-based optimizer module are explained below.
The following transformation steps are the main components:

 - SSA Transform
 - Common Subexpression Eliminator
 - Expression Simplifier
 - Redundant Assign Eliminator
 - Full Function Inliner

Selecting optimizations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default the optimizer applies its predefined sequence of optimization steps to
the generated assembly. You can override this sequence and supply your own using
the `--yul-optimizations` option:

``` bash
solc --optimize --ir-optimized --yul-optimizations 'dhfoD[xarrscLMcCTU]uljmul'
```

Available abbreviations are listed in the `Yul optimizer docs </docs/yul.rst#optimization-step-sequence>`_.

Preprocessing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The preprocessing components perform transformations to get the program
into a certain normal form that is easier to work with. This normal
form is kept during the rest of the optimization process.

> Disambiguator

Reviewer: I think this should be "inside" the Preprocessing section, i.e. it should be one header level smaller.

Author: adjusted the doc heights throughout the document

.. index:: optimizer, optimiser, common subexpression elimination, constant propagation

*************
The Optimizer
*************

The Solidity compiler uses two different optimizer modules: The “old” optimizer
that operates at opcode level and the “new” optimizer that operates on Yul IR code.

The opcode-based optimizer applies simplification rules from the
`list to opcodes <https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/libevmasm/RuleList.h>`_
next to each other. It also combines equal code sets and removes unused code.

The Yul-based optimizer is much more powerful, because it can work across function

> calls: In Yul it is not possible to perform arbitrary jumps, so it is for example

Reviewer 2: >  In Yul it is not possible to perform arbitrary jumps

No longer true because of `verbatim`. 

But not sure if we should talk about it here.

Author: What should I write instead then?

Reviewer 2: Let's leave it like that for now. I'll update it after the verbatim PR is merged.

possible to compute the side-effects of each function: If a function does not modify
storage, a call to it can be swapped with a function that does. If a function is
side-effect free and its result is multiplied by zero, you can remove the function
call completely.

Both optimizer modules are activated together when using ``--optimize`` in Solidity mode.

> Use ``solc --strict-assembly --optimize`` for a stand-alone Yul mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, the parameter ``--optimize`` activates the bytecode optimizer for the generated bytecode and the Yul optimizer for the Yul code generated for ABIv2 codec. For a Yul based codegen, one can use ``solc --ir-optimized --optimize`` to produce optimized Yul for a Solidity source. Similarly, use ``solc --strict-assembly --optimize`` for a stand-alone Yul mode.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe opcode instead of bytecode, since opcode is used later in the section.

Overall, the optimizer tries to simplify complicated expressions, which reduces both code
size and execution cost. It also specializes or inlines functions. Especially
function inlining is an operation that can cause much bigger code, but it is
often done because it results in opportunities for more simplifications.

Differences between Optimized and Non-Optimized Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generally, the most visible difference would be constant expressions getting evaluated.
When it comes to the ASM output, one can also notice reduction of equivalent/duplicate
“code blocks” (compare the output of the flags ``--asm`` and ``--asm --optimize``). However,
when it comes to the Yul/intermediate-representation, there can be significant
differences, for example, functions can get inlined, combined, rewritten to eliminate
redundancies, etc. (compare the output between the flags ``--ir`` and
``--optimize --ir-optimized``).

Optimize Runs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The number of runs (``--optimize-runs``) specifies roughly how often each opcode of the
deployed code will be executed across the life-time of the contract. A “runs” parameter

> of “1” will produce short but expensive code. The largest value is ``2**64-1``.

Reviewer 2: Actually the number ends up being `2**32 - 1`, or at least `numeric_limits<unsigned>::max()`. Because we configured boost program options to have that parameter as `unsigned`. Should we change it to `uint64_t`? @chriseth

Author: @chriseth?

Reviewer: Let's change this to `2**32-1`.

Opcode-Based Optimizer Module
=============================

The opcode-based optimizer module operates on assembly. It splits the
sequence of instructions into basic blocks at ``JUMPs`` and ``JUMPDESTs``.
Inside these blocks, the optimizer

> analyses the instructions and records every modification to the stack,

Reviewer 2: Is it analyse or analyze? :)

Author: It's the usual struggle that we aim for British English but here we are calling it "Optimizer" :D

Author: Adjusted it to `analyze` since we also talk about the `Dataflow Analyzer` below.

memory, or storage as an expression which consists of an instruction and
a list of arguments which are pointers to other expressions. The opcode-based optimizer
uses a component called "CommonSubexpressionEliminator" that amongst other
tasks, finds expressions that are always equal (on every input) and combines
them into an expression class. It first tries to find each new

> expression in a list of already known expressions. If this does not work,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
expression in a list of already known expressions. If no such matches are found,
```

contract than not inlining. This heuristics depends on the size of the function body, the
number of other references to its tag (approximating the number of calls to the function) and
the expected number of executions of the contract (the global optimizer parameter "runs").

Yul-Based Optimizer Module
==========================

The Yul-based optimizer consists of several stages and components that all transform
the AST in a semantically equivalent way. The goal is to end up either with code
that is shorter or at least only marginally longer but will allow further
optimization steps.

The optimizer currently follows a purely greedy strategy and does not do any
backtracking.

All components of the Yul-based optimizer module are explained below.
The following transformation steps are the main components:

 - SSA Transform
 - Common Subexpression Eliminator
 - Expression Simplifier
 - Redundant Assign Eliminator
 - Full Function Inliner

Selecting optimizations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default the optimizer applies its predefined sequence of optimization steps to
the generated assembly. You can override this sequence and supply your own using

> the `--yul-optimizations` option:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the ``--yul-optimizations`` option:
```

``` bash
solc --optimize --ir-optimized --yul-optimizations 'dhfoD[xarrscLMcCTU]uljmul'
```

> Available abbreviations are listed in the `Yul optimizer docs </docs/yul.rst#optimization-step-sequence>`_.

Reviewer 2: Probably we should mention what the `[` brackets do.

The sequence inside `[...]` will be applied multiple times in a loop until the Yul code remains unchanged or until the maximum number of rounds (currently 12) has been reached.

Preprocessing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The preprocessing components perform transformations to get the program
into a certain normal form that is easier to work with. This normal
form is kept during the rest of the optimization process.

Disambiguator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The disambiguator takes an AST and returns a fresh copy where all identifiers have

> names unique to the input AST. This is a prerequisite for all other optimizer stages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unique names in the input AST. This is a prerequisite for all other optimizer stages.
```

One of the benefits is that identifier lookup does not need to take scopes into account

> and we can basically ignore the result of the analysis phase.

Reviewer 2: What analysis phase are we referring to here?

Author: I don't know, I took this text as if from the Yul-optimizer readme.

> One of the benefits is that identifier lookup does not need to take scopes into account
> and we can basically ignore the result of the analysis phase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the benefits is that identifier lookup does not need to take scopes into account
which simplifies the analysis needed for other steps.
```

All subsequent stages have the property that all names stay unique. This means if
a new identifier needs to be introduced, a new unique name is generated.

Function Hoister
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The function hoister moves all function definitions to the end of the topmost block. This is
a semantically equivalent transformation as long as it is performed after the
disambiguation stage. The reason is that moving a definition to a higher-level block cannot decrease
its visibility and it is impossible to reference variables defined in a different function.

The benefit of this stage is that function definitions can be looked up more easily

> and functions can be optimized in isolation without having to traverse the AST.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and functions can be optimized in isolation without having to traverse the AST completely.
```

Function Grouper
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The function grouper has to be applied after the disambiguator and the function hoister.
Its effect is that all topmost elements that are not function definitions are moved
into a single block which is the first statement of the root block.

After this step, a program has the following normal form:

	{ I F... }

Where I is a (potentially empty) block that does not contain any function definitions (not even recursively)
and F is a list of function definitions such that no function contains a function definition.

The benefit of this stage is that we always know where the list of function begins.

### For Loop Condition Into Body

> This transformation moves the iteration condition of a for-loop into loop body.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This transformation moves the loop-iteration condition of a for-loop into loop body.
```

> We need this transformation because [expression splitter](#expression-splitter) won't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We need this transformation because [expression splitter](#expression-splitter) will not
```
We avoid contractions in docs.

apply to iteration condition expressions (the `C` in the following example).

    for { Init... } C { Post... } {
        Body...
    }

is transformed to

    for { Init... } 1 { Post... } {
        if iszero(C) { break }
        Body...
    }

> 

Reviewer 2: Could also add something like "This transformation can also be useful when paired with Loop Invariant Code motion. Because invariants in the loop-invariant conditions can then be taken outside the loop."

Author: Added.

depending on the control flow. All other variables never change their
value once they are defined. The advantage of this property is that
variables can be freely moved around and references to them
can be exchanged by their initial value (and vice-versa),
as long as these values are still valid in the new context.

Of course, the code here is far from being optimized. To the contrary, it is much
longer. The hope is that this code will be easier to work with and furthermore,
there are optimizer steps that undo these changes and make the code more
compact again at the end.

Expression Splitter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The expression splitter turns expressions like ``add(mload(x), mul(mload(y), 0x20))``
into a sequence of declarations of unique variables that are assigned sub-expressions
of that expression so that each function call has only variables or literals
as arguments.

The above would be transformed into

    {
        let _1 := mload(y)
        let _2 := mul(_1, 0x20)
        let _3 := mload(x)
        let z := add(_3, _2)
    }

Note that this transformation does not change the order of opcodes or function calls.

> It is not applied to loop conditions, because the loop control flow does not allow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is not applied to loop iteration-condition, because the loop control flow does not allow
```

this "outlining" of the inner expressions in all cases. We can sidestep this limitation by applying
[for loop condition into body](#for-loop-condition-into-body) to move the iteration condition into loop body.

The final program should be in a form such that (with the exception of loop conditions)
function calls cannot appear nested inside expressions

> and all function call arguments have to be constants or variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and all function call arguments have to be literals or variables.
```

 - ConditionalUnsimplifier - To be documented.
 - ControlFlowSimplifier - To be documented.
 - DeadCodeEliminator - To be documented.
 - :ref:`EquivalentFunctionCombiner<Equivalent Function Combiner>`.
 - ExpressionInliner - To be documented.
 - :ref:`ExpressionJoiner<Expression Joiner>`.
 - :ref:`ExpressionSimplifier<Expression Simplifier>`.
 - :ref:`ExpressionSplitter<Expression Splitter>`.
 - :ref:`ForLoopConditionIntoBody<For Loop Condition Into Body>`.
 - ForLoopConditionOutOfBody - To be documented.
 - :ref:`ForLoopInitRewriter<For Loop Init Rewriter>`.
 - :ref:`FullInliner<Full Function Inliner>`.
 - :ref:`FunctionGrouper<Fuction Grouper>`.
 - :ref:`FunctionHoister<Function Hoister>`.
 - FunctionSpecializer - To be documented.
 - LiteralRematerialiser - To be documented.
 - LoadResolver - To be documented.
 - LoopInvariantCodeMotion - To be documented.
 - :ref:`RedundantAssignEliminator<Redundant Assign Eliminator>`.
 - ReasoningBasedSimplifier - To be documented.
 - :ref:`Rematerialiser<Rematerialiser>`.
 - :ref:`SSAReverser<SSA Reverser>`.
 - :ref:`SSATransform<SSA Transform>`.
 - :ref:`StructuralSimplifier<Structural Simplifier>`.

>  - UnusedFunctionParameterPruner - To be documented.

Reviewer 2: If you want to add documentation for these, you can copy them from the corresponding header and `.cpp` files. Here `libyul/optimiser/UnusedFunctionParameterPruner.h` and `libyul/optimiser/UnusedFunctionParameterPruner.cpp`. Similarly, for the others in the same folder.

Author: So should I do this for all the remaining "to be documented" steps? Also, my question would be where they fit in since we structured them in their sequence as far as I understood? (And some of them seem to not be included in the current Yul optimizer sequence).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if it's structured as the sequence. I think, it's okay to have them alphabetically listed.

> So should I do this for all the remaining "to be documented" steps?

Yes, that would be nice. The `optimiser/Readme.md` might be outdated, however the `.h` header and `.cpp` files should contain some explanation about the step. Copying it to the documentation sounds good.

Author: They are currently categorized according to a few categories e.g.
- Preprocessing
- Pseudo-SSA Transformation
- Tools
- Statement-Scale Simplifications
...
Can we sort the remaining steps into these categories or should I get rid of those subtitles and put everything in alphabetical order? (For now I added the remaining steps at the end of the doc.)
